doc/md: sqlc guide (versioned) (#1398)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/frameworks/sqlc-versioned.md

configuration](https://docs.sqlc.dev/en/latest/reference/config.html#sql) to the migration directory, and depending on
the migration directory format you use, things should just work.

While this is possible, there are downsides to it, first this can be error-prone, since the process of generating the
SQL commands still has to be done manually. Keeping the computed state from all the SQL files can be quite easy for
Atlas or sqlc, but this is not true for us humans, where having a single SQL file with the schema defined on it would be
a lot easier.

## Migration Authoring

Atlas has support for a strategy that combines the simplicity of the declarative workflow with the control provided by
the versioned one. With this approach, which is called "[versioned migration authoring](https://atlasgo.io/versioned/diff)", we still define our desired
state in HCL or SQL but use Atlas to compute the required changes, storing them in the migration directory as SQL files.

This strategy brings the best of both worlds, we can have a single source of truth (our desired state) and have all the
authored SQL files that will be used to reach the desired state.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

To learn more about this approach and see it in action, watch this [YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-UlkXtp3OY)

```

---
id: sqlc-versioned
title: Versioned migrations for sqlc
slug: /guides/frameworks/sqlc-versioned
---

> In our [previous sqlc guide](/guides/frameworks/sqlc-declarative) we saw how we can use Atlas to handle the schema

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our [previous sqlc guide](/guides/frameworks/sqlc-declarative), we saw how we can use Atlas to handle the schema
```

management process using the [declarative workflow](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#declarative-migrations). This
works great in many situations, but some teams prefer the imperative approach where schema changes are explicitly
checked in to source control and verified during code review
(see [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FCeIjPb4AYs) to learn why).

To accommodate such cases, Atlas supports another kind of workflow for handling migrations,
called [versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations), where the changes are stored as
SQL files
and replayed on the database as needed. This ensures that the code to be executed on the database is known and approved
beforehand and gives engineers ultimate control on exactly what code is going to be run in production.

> In this guide we will see how we can use sqlc with Atlas, using the versioned migration's workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this guide we will see how we can use sqlc with Atlas, using the versioned migrations workflow.
```

:::note

> If you haven't already done so, it's helpful if you have read the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you haven't already done so, it will be helpful to have read the
```

previous [sqlc guide](/guides/frameworks/sqlc-declarative) where we have explained some concepts that we will expand
on in this guide. You should also check
the [sqlc getting started with PostgreSQL](https://docs.sqlc.dev/en/latest/tutorials/getting-started-postgresql.html)

> guide since this guide continues where the sqlc guide left off.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
guide since this guide continues where it left off.
```

:::

## Versioned migrations

[Versioned migrations](/concepts/declarative-vs-versioned#versioned-migrations) is a migration workflow where whenever
we want to change the database schema, we create a _migration file_, which is an SQL file containing SQL statements to
upgrade the schema from the current version to the next. Many schema management tools, such as Flyway and Liquibase,
support this strategy and Atlas supports it as well.

> Atlas's versioned migrations workflow works very well wit sqlc. In fact, in most cases, you can simply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atlas's versioned migrations workflow works very well with sqlc. In fact, in most cases, you can simply
```

point [sqlc schema configuration](https://docs.sqlc.dev/en/latest/reference/config.html#sql) to the migration directory,
and things should just work.

Usually, teams using versioned migrations author the migration files manually. While this is a common approach, there
are obvious downsides to it. Writing migrations by hand can be both error-prone and time-consuming for developers.

## Migration Authoring

Atlas has support for a strategy that combines the simplicity of the declarative workflow with the control provided by
the versioned one. With this approach, which is
called "[versioned migration authoring](/versioned/diff)", we still define our desired state in HCL or
SQL but use Atlas to compute the required changes, storing them in the migration directory as SQL files.

> This strategy brings the best of both worlds, we can have a single source of truth (our desired state) and have all the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This strategy brings the best of both worlds, where we can have a single source of truth (our desired state) and have all the
```

authored SQL files that will be used to reach the desired state. To learn more about this approach and see it in action,
watch this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L-UlkXtp3OY).

> Now that we have a bit of understanding of all the concepts, let's see how we can use Atlas with sqlc, using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have a bit of an understanding of all the concepts, let's see how we can use Atlas with sqlc, using
```

the `schema.sql` as our desired state and combine versioned migrations with migration authoring.

## Creating the initial migration directory

> The first thing we should do is create the initial migration directory, if you are following

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first thing we should do is create the initial migration directory. If you are following
```

the [sqlc getting started with PostgreSQL](https://docs.sqlc.dev/en/latest/tutorials/getting-started-postgresql.html)
your `schema.sql` and `query.sql` should look like this:

```sql title="schema.sql"
CREATE TABLE authors
(
    id   BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    name text NOT NULL,
    bio  text
);
```

```sql title="query.sql"
-- name: GetAuthor :one
SELECT *
FROM authors
WHERE id = $1
LIMIT 1;

-- name: ListAuthors :many
SELECT *
FROM authors
ORDER BY name;

-- name: CreateAuthor :one
INSERT INTO authors (name, bio)
VALUES ($1, $2)
RETURNING *;

-- name: DeleteAuthor :exec
DELETE
FROM authors
WHERE id = $1;
```

We have to generate a diff of our desired state (`schema.sql`) and our current state (the migration directory, that
right now doesn't even exist), we can generate the diff with a simple command:

```shell
atlas migrate diff initial_schema \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --to "file://schema.sql" \
  --dev-url "docker://postgres?search_path=public"
```

> A new `migrations` directory should be created with two files on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A new `migrations` directory should be created with two files in it.
```

```text
.
├── 20230102211759_initial_schema.sql
└── atlas.sum
```

As expected, the `20230102211759_initial_schema.sql` file holds the commands to create our initial schema.

```sql title="20230102211759_initial_schema.sql"
-- create "authors" table
CREATE TABLE "authors" ("id" bigserial NOT NULL, "name" text NOT NULL, "bio" text NULL, PRIMARY KEY ("id"));
```

:::info
Like in the last guide, we need a temporary database to check, simulate and validate the
generated queries. This database is provided using the `dev-url` flag. Atlas has support for running database
containers, which is what we are using in this example. Fore more information about dev

> database, [read about it here](/concepts/dev-database).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
databases, [read about them here](/concepts/dev-database).
```

:::

> From the sqlc side, we don't have to do anything since have not changed our `schema.sql` or `query.sql` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From the sqlc side, we don't have to do anything since we have not changed our `schema.sql` or `query.sql` file.
```

## Migrating the database

In this guide, we are using a Postgres

> database running in a local Docker container, you can start such a container by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
database running in a local Docker container. You can start such a container by running:
```

```shell
docker run --rm -d --name atlas-sqlc -p 5432:5432 -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass -e POSTGRES_DB=sqlc postgres
```

> Now that we have our base migration directory and target database, we can migrate our schema based on it, to do so we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that we have our base migration directory and target database, we can migrate our schema based on it. To do so, we
```

have to use a command very similar to the one used on the previous guide.

```shell
atlas migrate apply --url "postgres://postgres:pass@localhost:5432/sqlc?sslmode=disable"
```

The command `migrate apply` connects to the given database [URL](/concepts/url) provided in the `url` flag, checks the

> current state of the database and applies any pending migration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
current state of the database and applies any pending migrations.
```

	-> CREATE TABLE "authors" ("id" bigserial NOT NULL, "name" text NOT NULL, "bio" text NULL, PRIMARY KEY ("id"));
  -- ok (3.282921ms)

  -------------------------
  -- 4.570005ms
  -- 1 migrations
  -- 1 sql statements
```

## Updating the schema

The process of changing our schema is quite easy and similar to the declarative way. First we update our `schema.sql`
file, let's add a new `age` column.

```sql title="schema.sql" {5-6}
CREATE TABLE authors
(
    id   BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
    name text NOT NULL,
    bio  text,
    age  integer
);
```

Let's add a new `GetAuthorsByAge` query and update our `CreateAuthor` query as well.

```sql title="query.sql" {7-11,19-20}
-- name: GetAuthor :one
SELECT *
FROM authors
WHERE id = $1
LIMIT 1;

-- name: GetAuthorsByAge :many
SELECT *
FROM authors
WHERE age = $1
ORDER BY age;

-- name: ListAuthors :many
SELECT *
FROM authors
ORDER BY name;

-- name: CreateAuthor :one
INSERT INTO authors (name, bio, age)
VALUES ($1, $2, $3)
RETURNING *;

-- name: DeleteAuthor :exec
DELETE
FROM authors
WHERE id = $1;
```

When working with sqlc, after every change to the `schema.sql` or `query.sql` file, we should execute the sqlc generate

> command again, even in the cases where the changes seens to not cause problems, like adding a new column, this is a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
command again. Even in the cases where the changes seem to not cause problems, like adding a new column, this is a
```

requirement from sqlc, since it replaces the `*` with explicit column names.

```shell
sqlc generate
```

:::note

> sqlc only shows messages when encountering an error, if the generator process occurred successful, no output should be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sqlc only shows messages when encountering an error, if the generator process was successful, no output should be
```

shown.
:::

The `models.go` and `query.sql.go` should have been updated accordingly. Now we only have to update our `migrations`
directory, we can use the same command from before, using "add_age_field" as our migration name this time:

```shell
atlas migrate diff add_age_field \
  --dir "file://migrations" \
  --to "file://schema.sql" \
  --dev-url "docker://postgres?search_path=public"
```

> If you look at the migration directory, a new SQL file should be created with the commands required for adding a new

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you look at the migration directory, a new SQL file should be created with the statements required for adding a new
```

> column called `age`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`age` column.
```
